README.md, before:

# [SolidTime](https://github.com/solidtime-io/solidtime) Standalone Report Generator

Provides a method of generating reports using templates outside of the
excellent [SolidTime Open-Source Time Tracker](https://github.com/solidtime-io/solidtime).

## Quick Start

- Create a config.yml with the following format:

```yaml
defaults:
# Optionally specify your organization ID below to save
# having to type it in every time.
#
#organization: c978f137-d5ac-4c33-87b8-df34fb4718fb

# Details to reach PostGres database
db:
  host: <hostname>
  database: <database>
  username: <username>
  password: <password>

gotenberg:
  uri: http://<address.to.gotenberg>:3000
```

- Make sure the database is reachable. Also `gotenberg`.

- If you download this directly from github you need to make sure to create a python venv and to
  install all the dependancies in `requirements.txt`. Doing the following under Linux might work:

```shell
cd (folder where you see app)
python -m venv .venv            # Creates virtual environment
source .venv/bin/activate       # Enter virtual environemtn
pip install -r requirements.txt # Install dependencies
```

- Execute a report and specify date range. For example:

```shell
python app/report.py generate staff_times --start 2023-01-01 --end 2026-01-01 output.pdf 
```

Report will be saved to `output.pdf`

- Optionally a logo can be added by saving it in a file `logo.png` then adding `--add logo.png` to the command.
- Optionally you can also supply a `custom.css` to have it included in the template to override the styles without
  needing to edit the template.
- Add `--help` for other options like filtering by Project or changing templates.

## Why

There are an infinite number of ways of presenting data and no app will every be able to support
every possible option and for good reason. For this reason I decided to try make it easier for anyone
who wants to generate reports from SolidTime to be able to create their own reports.

Right now we just query the database directly which means this generator is only useful for those
who run the on-prem version of SolidTime. Perhaps pulling the data through the API will
allow support where the database is not directly reachable.

## Reports

The available reports are found under `reports`. This is the meaty bit of the
reports, written in python, that query the database and aggregate the data.

The following reports are available:

- `staff_times` - Generate a list of hours' staff have worked and show all the jobs they worked on.
  Descriptions of the same projects are merged per day. Time is added up each day then is rounded up to the nearest 30
  minutes unless it is within 15% (4.5 minutes) of the boundary in which case it rounds down unless it would round down
  to 0 in which case it rounds up. This emulates filling in a timesheet manually. The actual times are shown in the
  detail section on the right and the rounded times to the left under the dates as well as in the summary above.

![Page1](doc/staff_times1.png)
![Page2](doc/staff_times2.png)

## Templates

Each report will pass its data through one or more templates which can be found under `templates/html`. These are
[Jinja2](https://jinja.palletsprojects.com/en/stable/) and you can specify which template to use often by passing
`--template <templatename>` (it will add the .html automatically). This allows one to copy an existing template and
modify it for their need's then run it through the same report.

There are some filters which can be found under `filters` and can be used in the template. The filters are:

- `format_time` Formats time in seconds to a string of the format 'xxd xxh xxm', for example '02d 12h 10m'.
- `format_hours` Formats time in seconds into hours. Example: `6.09`
- `pick_color` Takes a number input and returns a css color from a list. Example `0` will return `#ef5350`

In the template you can use a filter by passing it as `|filter`. For example: `Duration: {{ my_hours|format_time }}`


## Actions

Instead of just generating reports you can instead configure `actions`. This allows you to create one or more steps 
that execute some code that does something. These can be found under `actions`.

You might want to email a summary of everyones times to accounts and also send to each staff their own times. This can
be defined as a 2 step action by adding the following to `config.yml`

```yaml
actions:
  summary_to_accounts:
    - description: Send a summary to Accounts
      action: send_staff_times_summary
      defaults:
        organization: ab08c709-4d3d-4d47-8ae1-b92998486b7c
        add:
          - logo.png
          - custom.css
      subject: Summary of times for period {start} - {end}
      email_logo: logo.png
      recipients:
        - name: Accounts Dept
          email: accounts@example.org
          
    - description: Send staff their own times
      action: send_staff_times_individual
      subject: Summary of your times for period {start} - {end}
      email_logo: logo.png
```

This creates an `action group` called `summary_to_accounts`.

You'll also need to add some email settings to `config.yml` in the following format:
```yaml
email:
  host: <hostname>>
  port: 587
  username: <username>>
  password: <password>
  from_name: <Friendly From Name>>
  from_email: <From Email>
```

Now to execute the action:
```shell
python app/report.py action summary_to_accounts --var start=2025-01-01 --var end=2025-02-01
```

This will build an email using a template in a Jinjafied [mjml format](mjml.io) located in `templates/email`.

![](doc/email1.png)


## Docker Builds

This can be built into a docker image. This is useful as it means you don't need to make the database and gotenberg
visible since you can just run the docker image on the same virtual network as that they use.

To build the docker image do the following:

1. Clone the repo to a folder
```shell
git clone https://github.com/bundabrg/solidreport.git
```

2. Build the image
```shell
docker build solidreport -t solidreport
```

3. Create a folder to place your files in. Lets call it `override`. You can also create a folder for output files to go in called `output`
```shell
mkdir override output
```

4. Place your `config.yml` file into `override`. You can also create a `template` folder under there to provide
your own custom templates. If you have a logo and `custom.css` it can also go under `override`. The 
hostname for database would be `database` and gotenberg would be `gotenberg` if you followed the solidtime
docker-compose guide.

5. Find out the network of your solidtime. In my case it is `solidtime_internal`
```shell
docker network ls
```

6. Execute solidreport
```shell
docker run -it  \
   -v ./override:/override \
   -v ./output:/output \
   solidreport generate staff_times 
```


## Contributing

Feel free to provide PR's, especially for reports and templates. You may have an idea of presenting data that
is unique and of interest to someone else.

The following would be useful:

- More Reports
- More Templates for existing reports
- Localization
- Documentation (how to write a report/template for
  example). [mkdocs-material](https://github.com/squidfunk/mkdocs-material) is what
  I normally like and can be published via github action to pages.
- Github actions to build a docker image. Advantage of this is we don't need to make db and gotenberg visible.

Commit message:

Make the output and input folder the same for Docker

README.md, after:

# [SolidTime](https://github.com/solidtime-io/solidtime) Standalone Report Generator

Provides a method of generating reports using templates outside of the
excellent [SolidTime Open-Source Time Tracker](https://github.com/solidtime-io/solidtime).

## Quick Start

- Create a config.yml with the following format:

```yaml
defaults:
# Optionally specify your organization ID below to save
# having to type it in every time.
#
#organization: c978f137-d5ac-4c33-87b8-df34fb4718fb

# Details to reach PostGres database
db:
  host: <hostname>
  database: <database>
  username: <username>
  password: <password>

gotenberg:
  uri: http://<address.to.gotenberg>:3000
```

- Make sure the database is reachable. Also `gotenberg`.

- If you download this directly from github you need to make sure to create a python venv and to
  install all the dependancies in `requirements.txt`. Doing the following under Linux might work:

```shell
cd (folder where you see app)
python -m venv .venv            # Creates virtual environment
source .venv/bin/activate       # Enter virtual environemtn
pip install -r requirements.txt # Install dependencies
```

- Execute a report and specify date range. For example:

```shell
python app/report.py generate staff_times --start 2023-01-01 --end 2026-01-01 output.pdf 
```

Report will be saved to `output.pdf`

- Optionally a logo can be added by saving it in a file `logo.png` then adding `--add logo.png` to the command.
- Optionally you can also supply a `custom.css` to have it included in the template to override the styles without
  needing to edit the template.
- Add `--help` for other options like filtering by Project or changing templates.

## Why

There are an infinite number of ways of presenting data and no app will every be able to support
every possible option and for good reason. For this reason I decided to try make it easier for anyone
who wants to generate reports from SolidTime to be able to create their own reports.

Right now we just query the database directly which means this generator is only useful for those
who run the on-prem version of SolidTime. Perhaps pulling the data through the API will
allow support where the database is not directly reachable.

## Reports

The available reports are found under `reports`. This is the meaty bit of the
reports, written in python, that query the database and aggregate the data.

The following reports are available:

- `staff_times` - Generate a list of hours' staff have worked and show all the jobs they worked on.
  Descriptions of the same projects are merged per day. Time is added up each day then is rounded up to the nearest 30
  minutes unless it is within 15% (4.5 minutes) of the boundary in which case it rounds down unless it would round down
  to 0 in which case it rounds up. This emulates filling in a timesheet manually. The actual times are shown in the
  detail section on the right and the rounded times to the left under the dates as well as in the summary above.

![Page1](doc/staff_times1.png)
![Page2](doc/staff_times2.png)

## Templates

Each report will pass its data through one or more templates which can be found under `templates/html`. These are
[Jinja2](https://jinja.palletsprojects.com/en/stable/) and you can specify which template to use often by passing
`--template <templatename>` (it will add the .html automatically). This allows one to copy an existing template and
modify it for their need's then run it through the same report.

There are some filters which can be found under `filters` and can be used in the template. The filters are:

- `format_time` Formats time in seconds to a string of the format 'xxd xxh xxm', for example '02d 12h 10m'.
- `format_hours` Formats time in seconds into hours. Example: `6.09`
- `pick_color` Takes a number input and returns a css color from a list. Example `0` will return `#ef5350`

In the template you can use a filter by passing it as `|filter`. For example: `Duration: {{ my_hours|format_time }}`


## Actions

Instead of just generating reports you can instead configure `actions`. This allows you to create one or more steps 
that execute some code that does something. These can be found under `actions`.

You might want to email a summary of everyones times to accounts and also send to each staff their own times. This can
be defined as a 2 step action by adding the following to `config.yml`

```yaml
actions:
  summary_to_accounts:
    - description: Send a summary to Accounts
      action: send_staff_times_summary
      defaults:
        organization: ab08c709-4d3d-4d47-8ae1-b92998486b7c
        add:
          - logo.png
          - custom.css
      subject: Summary of times for period {start} - {end}
      email_logo: logo.png
      recipients:
        - name: Accounts Dept
          email: accounts@example.org
          
    - description: Send staff their own times
      action: send_staff_times_individual
      subject: Summary of your times for period {start} - {end}
      email_logo: logo.png
```

This creates an `action group` called `summary_to_accounts`.

You'll also need to add some email settings to `config.yml` in the following format:
```yaml
email:
  host: <hostname>>
  port: 587
  username: <username>>
  password: <password>
  from_name: <Friendly From Name>>
  from_email: <From Email>
```

Now to execute the action:
```shell
python app/report.py action summary_to_accounts --var start=2025-01-01 --var end=2025-02-01
```

This will build an email using a template in a Jinjafied [mjml format](mjml.io) located in `templates/email`.

![](doc/email1.png)


## Docker Builds

This can be built into a docker image. This is useful as it means you don't need to make the database and gotenberg
visible since you can just run the docker image on the same virtual network as that they use.

To build the docker image do the following:

1. Clone the repo to a folder
```shell
git clone https://github.com/bundabrg/solidreport.git
```

2. Build the image
```shell
docker build solidreport -t solidreport
```

3. Create a folder to place your files in. Lets call it `sr-data`. 
```shell
mkdir sr-data
```

4. Place your `config.yml` file into `sr-data`. You can also create a `template` folder under there to provide
your own custom templates. If you have a logo and `custom.css` it can also go under `sr-data`. The 
hostname for database would be `database` and gotenberg would be `gotenberg` if you followed the solidtime
docker-compose guide.

5. Find out the network of your solidtime. In my case it is `solidtime_internal`. It might be called `docker_internal`.
```shell
docker network ls
```

6. Execute solidreport
```shell
docker run -it  \
   --network=solidtime_internal \
   -v ./sr-data:/sr-data \
   solidreport generate staff_times 
```


## Contributing

Feel free to provide PR's, especially for reports and templates. You may have an idea of presenting data that
is unique and of interest to someone else.

The following would be useful:

- More Reports
- More Templates for existing reports
- Localization
- Documentation (how to write a report/template for
  example). [mkdocs-material](https://github.com/squidfunk/mkdocs-material) is what
  I normally like and can be published via github action to pages.
- Github actions to build a docker image. Advantage of this is we don't need to make db and gotenberg visible.
